 CONTENTS
1. THE GAME
2. THE CITY
3. THE PLAYER SHEET
4. ACTIONS & COMMANDS
5. SKILLS
6. ITEMS
7. FOLLOWERS
8. FRIENDS & FOES
9. OPTIONS & HINTS


<SECTION>
1. THE GAME
-----------

 SETTING & OBJECTIVE
 -------------------
It's a zombie apocalypse. You have to find ways to survive: food, shelter, weapons and companions.
Livings need to eat and sleep, and can die if you become starved. Most of the manual is written with playing a living survivor in mind.
You can also reincarnate into different characters when you die, or play the game as an undead.
Your town is known for being the headquarters of the world famous C.H.A.R. Corporation. You've heard strange rumors about them...


 GAME MODE
 ---------
There are 3 different game modes, each enabling or disabling some aspects of the game.
STANDARD (STD) : The default game setting
CORPSES AND INFECTION (C&I) : Add infection and corpses
VINTAGE (VTG) : C&I and a limited selection of zombie types for a more classic feel


 CHARACTER CREATION
 ------------------
You can start as a living (a civilian survivor) or an undead. When starting as an undead you can choose your race.
Starting as a living you can choose a gender and a starting skill. See the Skills section for mode details.


 PROGRESSION
 -----------
Livings and undeads progress differently.
* Livings gain a level with each sunrise. You can upgrade a skill from a set of skills presented at random.
* Undeads need to kill to evolve into a more powerful undead. Not all undeads evolve.


 BASIC GAMEPLAY
 --------------
Rogue Survivor handles combat and progression differently than most roguelikes.
The game doesn't change the difficulty depending on your level and there is no obvious difficulty progression.
Don't expect to be able to bash zombies left and right recklessly, even with lots of skill upgrades.
You should fear for your life and make use of the Run action. Don't hesitate to flee and hide; you don't HAVE to kill every undead in sight. 
Undeads, however, play very differently from livings...


 EVENTS
 ------
From time to time scpecial events will happen. The game will inform you when relevant, and you will learn them as you play.
You can miss some events notification when sleeping or being in the wrong district. Life goes on without you.


 INFECTION (for Vintage and C&I modes)
 ---------
Some undeads infect livings when they hurt them. Infection does not worsen or heals by itself over time.
You only get more infected with bites and you can only heal with meds.


 CORPSES (for Vintage and C&I modes)
 -------
Dead people become corpses. Corpses decay over time and will rot away.
Infected corpses might rise as new undeads. They are more likely to rise if they are fresh, infected and at night.


ADVISOR
-------
The game has a hint system for new players called the Advisor. You can enable or disable the Advisor in the options.
The hints will teach you most game controls and the gameplay basics. The advisor is focused on learning the game as a survivor.


REINCARNATION
-------------
After you die you can have the chance to reincarnate into another character in the same district.
That means you can continue playing the game with an actor that was previously controlled by the AI (ie an NPC).
You get a variety of choices, but not all of which may not be available at the time of your death.
- Random Actor     : an actor
- Random Living    : a living actor
- Random Undead    : an undead actor
- Random Follower  : one of your follower
- Your Killer      : the actor who directly killed you
- Your Zombie Self : if zombified, your ex-character turned zombie

You then reincarnate into the body of the avatar and continue the game from there.
It's a choice given to you to explore new ways to play the game. If you want a 'pure' permadeath you can disable reincarnation.
You can set some options to control how reincarnation works (see the options section).



<SECTION>
2. THE CITY
-----------

You can see what you know about the city by using the City Info command (default I).

> DISTRICTS
The City is divided into Districts. Districts are numbered by their coordinates on the city map starting at 0-0 for the northwest district.
Each District is a different map. You can move around the city by exiting a district at the borders.
When entering a district the game will simulate the district if you have the option enabled. See Options for more details.
There are different kinds of districts, each being likely to have different types of buildings.

- District             : generic district, a bit of everything
- Business Districts   : mostly CHAR Corp offices and houses
- Green District       : mostly parks and houses
- Residential District : mostly houses
- Shopping District    : mostly shops and houses


> SEWERS
A sewer network runs under each district. Sewer networks are linked to the surface and to each neighbouring network.
You can visit the sewers by finding a ladder and climbing down. It's dark there; you should bring a torch.
Oh, and you've heard the urban legend about a monster lurking down there...


> SUBWAY
A Subway line runs through the middle of the city from the west to the east. Only those districts are linked by the subway.
You can visit the subway by finding a station on the surface and going down stairs. Like sewers it's dark down there.


> SHOPS
Shops carry different items. But it's an apocalypse, so sooner or later there will be nothing left.
- Construction  : tools and construction material
- General Store : a bit of everything
- Grocery       : groceries and canned food
- Gunshop       : guns, the shopkeeper barricaded the doors but that shouldn't stop you
- Pharmacy      : medicines and first aid
- Sportswear    : bats, clubs and if you are lucky hunting tools or weapons


> OTHER BUILDINGS
- Sewers Maintenance : there is one of them in most districts
- Subway Station     : there is one in each district linked by the subway line
- CHAR Offices       : private property, you are not supposed to go there...


> DAY AND NIGHT
During the night your FoV (field of view = distance at which you can see) diminish and you tire faster.
Undeads are not affected by day or night.


> WEATHER
Weather can change daily. Some weather types have an effect.
- Sunny and Cloudy : no effect
- Rain             : livings FoV - 1, scents decay faster
- Heavy rain       : livings FoV - 2, scents decay even faster

Undeads are not affected by FoV changes, but undeads using smell will have more trouble following their prey when scents fade faster.
Rain has also a chance to put out fires, such as burning cars.


> PERSONAL ENEMIES
Most livings are normally friendly with each other, but might become personal enemies, at which point are treated like normal enemies by the game.
Personal enemies are for life, you can't make peace with them. It is generally not a good idea to make an enemy of a cop or a soldier.
A leader will share personal enemies with his followers, and vice-versa, but followers won't share enemies between them.


> MURDER & LAW
In the game a "murder" is killing a living that is not in an enemy faction, even if they are personal enemies.
For instance, a civilian killing another civilian. Killing in self-defence is still a considered a murder.
Gangs and the like are not considered murderers since they are already enemies with the law abiding citizens.
Citizens might try to murder people for food if they desperatly need it.
One can avoid confrontation by giving in to their demands; drop food and let them take it or directly give them food.
As soon as they can get food they will stop being aggressive. But once fighting has started it's too late.

Cops are law enforcers and are on the look out for murderers. Cops have a licence to kill murderers.
Cops might recognize a murderer when they see him and will always spot a murder being committed if they see it.
Murderers who move closer to cops and who have committed more murders are more likely to be recognized.
Since killing in self-defence is a murder, it can happen that cops commit murders.
Times are tough, and sometimes you will have no choice but to commit murder to save your own life or defend your possessions.



<SECTION>
3. PLAYER SHEET
---------------

Your name and appearance are generated when you start a new game.

> HIT POINTS (HP)
How much hurt you can take. Damage dealt to your HP is also dealt to your STA. At zero or less HP you die.
Sleeping on a couch or bed will slowly heal you, as does use of bandages and medical kits.


> STAMINA (STA)
Some actions tire you, represented as a cost to STA. Below a certain level you become Tired and your Speed decrease.
You automatically recover a small amount of STA each turn. Waiting recovers more STA. Some items help you recover STA.
To perform certain actions you need enough stamina. Performing tiring actions during the night cost more than during the day.


> FOOD (FOO)
You need to eat food to survive. Food points slowly decrease each turn.
Below a certain level you become Hungry and at zero points you are Starved.
-Hungry : you cannot sleep.
-Starved : in addition you have a chance to die of starvation each turn.
Eating expired food will recover much less points. Eating spoiled food might make you vomit.


> SLEEP (SLP)
You have to sleep to stay healthy. Sleep points slowly decrease each turn, and decrease more rapidly at night.
Below a certain level you become Sleepy and at zero points you are Exhausted.
-Sleepy : your Speed, Attack, Defence and FOV decrease.
-Exhausted : the penalties are much worse.
Use of some medicines recovers SLP. Sleeping recovers SLP. See the Sleeping action for more details.

> SANITY (SAN)
Sanity points slowly descrease each turn. You can read books and magazines, or kill undead to regain sanity.
Witnessing deaths, and watching corpses turn into zombies reduces your sanity.
When you run out of Sanity completely you are insane, and might find yourself losing control of you mind and body.
Sanity can be disabled in the options.


> INFECTION (INF)
In C&I and VTG game modes some undeads deal Infection damage. Your infection "hit points" is the sum of your max HPs and max STA.
As your infection % increase, you feel more and more sick. When infection reaches 100% you may die.


> MELEE STATS (Atk, Dmg)
Atk : influence how likely you are to score a hit vs an enemy defence value.
Dmg : maximum damage you can do in a hit vs livings/undeads.
Attacking is a tiring action and costs STA. Use of Melee Weapons increase your Melee Atk and Melee Dmg, but might cost additional STA.


> RANGED STATS (Atk, Dmg, Rng, Amo)
Ranged attack. Atk and Dmg values works the same as Melee. Ranged attacks have an additional Range (Rng) value.
Rng : How far the weapon can fire and the weapon efficient range.
Amo : How many ammunitions left in the weapon.
Attacking with a ranged weapon usually cost no STA. See the Firing action description for more details.


> DEFENCE (Def)
You have a natural base value for Defence (Def). Used when defending from all kinds of attacks.


> ARMOR (Arm)
Reduces amount of damage dealt to you when hit or shot at. You have no natural protection. Equiping some items improves your armor ratings.


> SPEED (Spd)
How fast you are. The higher the better. In certain circumstances your Spd will temporary increase or decrease.
You start with a base value of 1.0, meaning you can perform one standard action per turn.
Undeads are generally slower than livings.
Under the hood the game use an Action Points (AP) system : every action cost a number of AP and Spd measure how much AP you recover each turn.


> FIELD OF VIEW (FOV)
How far you can see. Weather can diminish your FoV.
During the night your FoV will progressively diminish. During the day your FoV will progressively increase back to its maximum value.


> SMELL (SML) - Undeads only.
Smell rating for undeads.


> FOLLOWERS
How many followers are in your party. See the Followers section for more details.


> INVENTORY
You have a limited number of slots in your inventory but you can stack some items together. Items highlighted in green are currently equiped.
Ranged weapons are shown with an ammo loaded gauge. Stackable items are shown with a quantity number.
Manage your items with using the mouse over items, or use/equip one item by using the item slot shortcut.
To equip/unequip or use an item : Left-Click.
To drop an item : Right-Click.


> ITEMS ON GROUND
The items on the tile you are currently standing are displayed in the same way as your inventory.
Manage items on the ground with the mouse.
To take an item : Left-Click.


> SKILLS
List your current skills and their level. See the Skills section for more details.



<SECTION>
4. ACTIONS & COMMANDS
---------------------

This section describes the actions you can perform in the game and the interactions with other actors and objects.
You can redefine the keys in game (default Shift-K).


> HELP  (default H)
Read this manual in-game.


> LOOKING  (mouse)
Move the mouse over things to get useful descriptions.


> MOVING  (default Numpad)
Walk or run around. If you try to move where you cannot you might "bump" into something.


> "BUMPING"
"Bumping" is trying to move into a tile occupied by someone or something. Some interactions are triggered by bumping:
-Jumping on or over an obstacle
-Opening doors
-Taking items from shelves and containers
-Chatting or trading with an actor
-Attacking an actor or a barricade


> USING AN EXIT  (default X)
Some exits (such as ladders and holes) allow you to move between maps. Stand on an exit and use the command.


> RUNNING   (default R)
You can start and stop running. When running you move 2x faster but it costs you STA.
If you are tired you can't run. If you tire while running you automatically stop.


> WAITING/RESTING  (default NumPad5)
Do nothing. You recover STA faster this way. Life still goes on around you.


> WAITING ONE HOUR  (default W)
Wait for one hour. Interrupted if you see enemies, become hungry or sleepy, or witness something important happening.


> CLOSING A DOOR/WINDOW  (default C)
Closes an adjacent door or window.


> SLEEPING  (default Z)
You can sleep anywhere but sleeping on a couch or bed recovers your SLP points faster and will slowly heal you.
You cannot sleep while Hungry. You will wake up when your SLP points are fully restored or when you become hungry.
While sleeping you are vulnerable to attacks. An attack will wake you up immediately.
Loud noises within a close distance have a chance to wake you up. The closer the noise the higher the chances.
You should be careful where and when you sleep. It's safer and healthier to find a bed and barricade the room for the night.
The game performs some simulations while you sleep if you have the option enabled. You may miss some special events if they happen during your sleep.


> JUMPING  (Bumping)
Jump or climb on something that is marked as jumpable. Jumping is a tiring action and cost some STA.


> TRADING  (Bumping)
The actor must be willing to trade and have an item to offer. Look for the "can trade" icon on the actor.
They will offer you an exchange of items and you can accept or decline the deal.
Before trading you should look at the actor to see what items they are carrying.
You can try trading as many times as you want. Some actors will not be interested in any of your items and will refuse to trade.


> ATTACKING AN ACTOR  (Bumping)
Perform a melee attack on an enemy. This is a tiring action and costs STA.
Melee weapons increase your Atk and Dmg. Most weapons cost additional STA to handle.


> ATTACKING A BARRICADE  (Bumping)
Perform a melee attack on a barricade to eventually break it. The material used to build the barricade is lost because of the destruction.


> FIRING  (default F)
Use the fire mode. You need to have an available ranged attack, such as a ranged weapon.
You usually need a clear line of fire to your target. You can only shoot through some objects such as windows or fences.
A ranged weapon has an Efficient Range which is usually half its maximum range.
When firing the line of fire is drawn:
- in red if you have no clear line of fire.
- in yellow when the target is beyond the efficient range and harder to hit.
- in green when the target is within the efficient range and easier to hit.
Your aiming accuracy is penalized if you are sleepy, exhausted, tired, or your stamina bar is not full.


> THROWING GRENADES  (Firing)
Equip a grenade and use the Fire action, targeting a tile. The distance of the throw depends on the grenade item and your Strong skill.
The throw is blocked only by walls and larger objects. You can lob grenades over people and some objects.
You do not need to have a view on the targeted tile; in other words you can often throw farther than your FoV.
The explosion always hits people or objects in the blast radius. It does more damage the closer one is to the center of the blast.


> TAKING AND DROPING ITEMS  (mouse)
Bump into a shelf or container to take items from it.
To take items from the ground, move the mouse over the item and left-click.
To drop items on your current tile, right-click the item in your inventory.


> EQUIPING/UNEQUIPING AND USING ITEMS  (mouse, default shortcuts Control-<number>)
To use/equip/unquip an item, left-click it in your inventory. Equiping/unequiping an item does cost a turn, but using an item does.


> GIVING ITEMS  (mouse, then default G)
Move the mouse over the item in your inventory, press the key, then choose someone next to you in a direction.
Giving item ends both your turn and the other actor's turn. The other actor must be awake and not an enemy.


> INITIATING TRADE  (default E)
You can initiate a trade deal by offering an item.
This works like normal trading, except you chose which the items you want to exhange.
Move the mouse over the item, press the key, then choose someone next to you in a direction.


> BARRICADING OBJECTS  (default B)
Use the barricade mode. You can barricade doors and windows, and repair fortifications.
You need to have barricading material such as wooden planks. Barricading consumes one quantity of such an item. 


> BREAKING OBJECTS  (default K)
You can break or dismantle some objects using a melee weapon. Some give barricading material when dismantled.


> PUSHING OBJECTS/SHOVING PEOPLE  (default P)
Push an object or shove someone in a direction. Only movable objects can be pushed. 
Pushing is a tiring action, it costs as much STA as the object weight.
Useful to block paths and make mobile barricades, or escaping crowds of zombies.


> MARK ENEMIES  (default Ctrl-E)
Enter the mark as enemies mode. Allows you to declare some nearby actors as personal enemies.
Takes effect immediatly and is a free action. Be careful, remember you can't cancel the personnal enemy status.


> BUILDING FORTIFICATIONS  (default N and Control-N)
You need the carpentry skill. You can build small (N) or large (Control-N) fortifications next to you.
Small fortification :
  - transparent.
  - breaks easily.
  - can be jumped on.
  - can be pushed.
  - use 2 barricading materials to build.
Large fortification :
  - opaque.
  - stronger.
  - blocks movement.
  - cannot be moved.
  - use 4 barrading materials to build.  
A level 3 carpentry skill lowers the amount of material you need to build fortifications.


> REPAIRING FORTIFICATIONS  (default B)
Use the "Barricading" action on a fortification. You do not need the carpentry skill to repair fortifications.


> LEADING  (default T)
Take or leave a follower. See the Followers section for more details.


> SWITCHING PLACE  (default Ctrl-S)
You can switch place with one of your followers. Useful when they are blocking you or you need a meatshield.


> ORDER  (default O)
Give orders or directives to your followers. See the Followers section for more details.


> SHOUTING  (default S)
Make a lot of noise. Useful to try to wake up nearby sleepers. The closer you are when shouting the more chance they have to wake up.


> USE SPRAY  (default A)
Use the spray you have equipped in your left hand. The action depends on the type of spray. See below for the different actions.


> SPRAY A TAG  (Use Spray with a Spray Paint item equipped)
Tag a symbol on a wall or the floor. If the option is enabled, the tag will also appear on your minimap as a colored dot.
You need to have some spray paint equipped. Tagging uses one quantity of paint. Useful to mark places in a district that you want to remember.


> SPRAY OR ERASE A SCENT  (Use Spray with a Spray Scent item equipped)
Add special perfume that neutralizes or strengthens other scents at the tile your are standing on.
Read the item description to learn what it does.
Eg: "Stench Killer" adds a perfume that removes some of the odor of living creatures for a short time. 
Useful to cover your tracks from the undeads. One spraying on a tile is often enough to confuse the pursuers.
Not so effective if an undead has already seen you.


> CITY INFO  (default I)
Show information you know about the city, such as the city districts layout.


> MESSAGES LOG  (default Shift-M)
Show more recent messages.


> ADVISOR HINT  (default Shift-H)
Display the advisor hint.


> ABANDONING & QUITTING  (default Shift-A, Shift-Q)
Abandoning by suicide gets you back to the main menu. Quitting the game exits the program.


> SAVING & LOADING  (default Shift-S, Shift-L)
You have only one save slot.


> OPTIONS & KEYBINDINGS  (default Shift-O, Shift-K)
You can set some game options and redefine the keys. Your options and keys preferences are automatically saved.
Options are applied immediatly but some take effect only when starting a new game. See the Options sections for more information.


> SCREENSHOT  (default Shift-N)
Takes a screenshot of the game. Screenshots are saved in your game installation folder.



<SECTION>
5. SKILLS
---------

All skills are passively applied when appropriate (ie. they add bonuses to actions and abilities).
Skill levels range from 0 to 5. Skills are helpful, but unlike many games you will never become extremely powerful.
When leveling up you get to choose one skill to learn or improve.
Undeads do not have skills and can only improve by evolving.


> AGILE
Helps you fight better. Increases your Melee Atk and your Def.


> AWAKE
Helps you staying awake longer. Increases your maximum SLP points and your SLP recovery speed when sleeping.


> BOWS
Improve your efficiency with bows. Increases the Atk and Dmg value when shooting bows.


> CARPENTRY
Helps you build stronger barricades and allows you to build fortifications.
Increases the barricading/repairing value of barricading items you use.
At level 3 consume one less barricading material when building fortifications.


> CHARISMATIC
Helps you building trust with your follower/s faster. Increases the trust of your followers each turn.
Increased chance of other people wanting to trade an item they would otherwise have no interest in.


> FIREARMS
Improves your efficiency with firearms. Increases the Atk and Dmg value when shooting firearms.


> HARDY
Sleeping anywhere can heal you - no more bed needed. Increased chance of healing while sleeping.


> HAULER
You can carry more. Increases the number of slots in your inventory.


> HIGH STAMINA
Helps you running and fighting longer. Increases your maximum STA.


> LEADERSHIP
Allows you to get more followers. Increases your maximum followers.


> LIGHT EATER
Helps you ignore your stomach. Increases your maximum FOO and the nutrition value of food items you eat.


> LIGHT SLEEPER
More prone to waking up. When sleeping, increases distance at which you notice loud noises and the chance of such noises waking you up.


> MARTIAL ARTS
Helps you fight better when unarmed. Increase your unarmed melee Atk and Dmg.


> MEDIC
Improves the benefits of medicine. Increases the values of medicine items you use.


> NECROLOGY
Deal more Dmg vs undeads (in melee and ranged).
Get more information on corpses :
    at level 1 = estimation of date of death.
    at level 3 = estimation of infection.
    at level 5 = estimation of chances to rise as a zombie within a day.


> STRONG
Increases your Dmg for Melee attacks. Increase your throwing range.


> TOUGH
Helps you stay alive a bit longer. Increases the maximum value of your HP.


> UNSUSPICIOUS
Increase the chances for a nearby law enforcer or gang member to ignore you.



<SECTION>
6. ITEMS
--------

- Ammo items         : use to reload.
- Barricade Material : reinforce doors and windows; use the barricade action.
- Body Armor         : reduces damage but can hinder your movements; has a chance to break; use to equip.
- Food               : use to eat.
- Light              : see farther in the dark; use to equip.
- Medicines          : use to heal or re-energize.
- Melee Weapon       : has a chance to break; use to equip.
- Ranged Weapon      : use to equip; fire action to fire.
  - Firearms         : the best ranged weapons.
  - Bows             : weaker and shorter range but ammunition is more available.
- Grenades           : have a fuse that last a few turns before exploding; fire action to throw.  
- Spray Paint        : tag places you want to remember; use the tag action.
- Spray Scent        : neutralize odors, typically to erase your tracks.
- Tracker            : keep contact with your people; use to equip.



<SECTION>
7. FOLLOWERS
------------

This section describes followers and what you can expect from them. Player undeads do not get followers.


> GETTING FOLLOWERS
To ask someone to follow you, use the Lead command. With no Leadership skill you cannot have followers.
The number of followers you can have at anytime is limited by your Leadership skill level.


> LEAVING FOLLOWERS
You can tell a follower to leave at anytime (unless they're sleeping).


> LEVELING UP
Followers level up with you.


> EXITING DISTRICTS WITH YOU
When you leave a district your followers will try to go with you.
To travel with you a follower must be adjacent to you when you leave the district, and must have an accessible spot next to you in the new district.
If he can't follow you (perhaps a car blocks the tile next to you in the new district) he will leave you.


> TRUST
Followers have to trust you before accepting your orders or directives. The following increase trust:
-Time passing together; +1 point per turn. 
-Giving them items, especially items they feel they need. 
-Killing their target or an adjacent enemy also increase trust.
Ordering them to give or drop items decreases trust.
If a follower trusts you, you can see the number of murders they've commited in their actor description (they've told you).


> CIVILIAN FOLLOWERS DIRECTIVES AND ORDERS
You can set directives for your civilian followers. Directives allow or disallow a specific behavior. All the behaviors are allowed by default.
You can also order your civilian followers to execute specific tasks.
When giving directives or orders you and the follower must be visible to each other, or you both must have a tracker equipped (such as a cell phone).
A follower can handle only one task at a time. If the task is no longer possible the follower will abandon it.
When performing a task a follower will focus on the task at hand and will ignore everything else, including his own safety...
When giving orders the target position must be visible by both you and the follower.

Directives
- Take items     : can the follower take items on his own (default yes).
- Fire weapons   : can the follower fire his ranged weapons (default yes).
- Throw grenades : can the follower throw his grenades (default yes).
- Sleep          : can the follower sleep when he needs to (default yes).
- Trade          : is the follower allowed to trade with other people (default yes).
- Fighting       : should the follower fight courageously, with caution or run away (default cautious).

Coward     : always flee melee
Cautious   : try fighting in melee intelligently
Courageous : always fight in melee when you do

Orders
- Cancel Order     : Give up current order.
- Barricade (one)  : Move to the position and barricade one time.
- Barricade (max)  : Move to the position and barricade as much as possible.
- Guard            : Move to the position and stand guard.
- Patrol           : Move to the position and patrol the zone(s).
- Drop all items   : Unequiped and drop all the items.
- Build small fort : Move to the position and build a small fortification.
- Build large fort : Move to the position and build a large fortification.
- Report events    : Tell you what they saw.
- Give me          : Give you one of their item - you must be next to him.

When on guard or patrol duty, the follower will have a very restricted behavior :
  - when seeing an enemy : shout or phone you to warn you and stop duty (cancel order)
  - when hungry : eat
  - when injured : heal

Typical orders use:
- Guard  : guard the entrace of your shelter while you sleep or are away.
- Patrol : scout a zone.
- Drop all items : unload your mule.
- Report events : you wake up or come back to the base and want to know if anything happened.


> TRACKING FOLLOWERS
If you and your follower have a cell phone equiped you will see his position on the mini map as a blue dot.
Useful when you get separated and want to find them, or want to give them orders and directives when out of sight.


> FOLLOWER BEHAVIOR
Your followers will most of the time stick with you, but those guys have their own mind too.
Sometimes they will help you fight, other times they will attempt to flee from danger.
If they see an interesting item they might go and pick it up, unless told not to.
If they need to eat or sleep they will do so, unless your directives disallow it.
There are pattern to their behaviors which you can use to your benefit.
You can give items to them with the Give action. You can also still trade items with them like a normal civilian or ask them to drop all their items.
From time to time you will see other people hanging with followers too. You're not the only wanna be hero in town you know.


> LEADER STRATEGIES
As a Leader you can use followers to your advantage. Here are four typical uses for followers:

* MEATSHIELDS
You don't have to care about them too much. Find ways to make them fight in your place or distract your enemies. 

* MULES
Living backpacks, if risky. Use the directives to disallow them everything, let them sleep only when you want.
Give them whatever you want, for instance a bunch of planks, and later trade them back. When they die, go get the items back later.

* COMPANIONS
You want to keep the same few folks around and make them highly skilled. It might be a challenging task but potentially very rewarding.
To keep them alive longer you should give them items they are lacking -such as fireweapons, medicine and food- and avoid exposing them to unnecessary dangers.
If they are in trouble seriously consider helping them rather than selfishly fleeing. If they lag behind wait for them. If they are sleeping cover them.

* FARMING
The idea here is to train a lot of civilians to make them stronger, which will indirectly make your survival easier. 
Take followers for a short time, care for them like you would do for Companions, and when strong enough release them.
Having a bunch of strong gun-toting civilians running around is bad news for Zombies and good news for you.



<SECTION>
8. FRIENDS & FOES
-----------------

UNDEADS
-------
Most of them are slower that living humans, but they never tire and are quite resistant to damage, because you know, they are already dead.
Some of them are dumb. Some of them can follow tracks or remember where they last saw that tasty meatbag. 
Some of them can break doors, windows and furniture to get to you. Some of them attract other undeads. 
Some of them can turn your dead friends into zombies, and some of them are your ex-friends.
Experience and looking at their descriptions will help you recognize the different threats they pose.


LIVINGS
-------
> CIVILIANS
Civilians want one thing; survive. They generally do their own thing. They have different names and different looks.

> CHAR EMPLOYEES
They seem to be very agressive and don't hesistate to shoot anyone near their offices. Don't go near them unless prepared.

> NATIONAL GUARDS
They are doing their duty to clean this mess and don't have time for your requests.

> OTHERS
You might encounter some other people. Friendly or hostile, it's for you to find out.



<SECTION>
9. OPTIONS & HINTS
------------------

OPTIONS
-------

> "Music"
Musics are not essential for gameplay. If you can't hear music, try the configuration program in the installation directory.


> "Animations Delay"
Enable or disable pauses when showing actions or events on the map. Disable for a faster interface.


> "Show tags on minimap"
Show or hide tags (created using spray paint) on the minimap as small yellow dots.


> "Enable advisor"
The advisor helps you learn the game as a living. Does not apply when playing as undead.


> "Combat Assistant"
When enabled, draws a colored indicator on your enemies :
- green  : you will be able to act again before this enemy does.
- yellow : this enemy will be able to act one time after you.
- red    : this enemy will be able to act two times or more after you.
In practice when next to an enemy :
- the green indicator means you can safely hit the enemy and move away from him next turn.
- the yellow indicator means the enemy can retaliate one time if you hit him now.
- the red indicator means the enemy can retaliate more than one time if you hit him now.

> "City Size"
Size of the city map. The city is a square grid of districts. Larger cities rapidly increases game save size and loading time.


> "District Map Size"
How large are the Districts within the city. Larger maps means more buildings and more items, but increases save size and loading time.


> "Max Civilians"
Maximum number of civilians on a map. More civilians makes the game easier, but also slows down turn processing.


> "Max Undeads"
Maximum number of undeads on a map. More undeads makes the game more challenging, but also slows down turn processing.


> "Day 0 Undeads"
Percent of Max Undeads spawned when the game starts.


> "Invasion Daily Increase"
The zombie horde grows in size each day, up to Max Undeads value. Controls the percentage of Max Undeads that are added at each invasion.


> "Zombification Chance"
Some undeads have the ability to turn their living victims into zombies after killing them.
This option controls the chances of such zombifications occuring. Changing this value has a large impact on game difficulty.


> "NPCs can starve to death"
Allow or disallow NPCs (mostly other civilians) to starve to death like the player. Disabling means they will never die from hunger.


> "Starved Zombification"
If living NPCs can starve to death, chance of them turning into a zombie.


> "Districts Simulation"
Simulate what happened in the district you're entering whilst you were not there.
You can set the amount of simulation performed. Higher percentages simulate in more detail but are slower to process.
You can disable this option if you don't care about this feature, or abort the simulation by keeping ESC pressed.
But it's an important part of the gameplay and you should keep it enabled if possible.


> "Simulate when Sleeping"
Enable or disable simulation of adjacent districts when you are sleeping.
This is useful if you intend to travel around the city regularly, as it will speed up changing districts.


> "Reveal Starting District"
Start the game with knowledge of the whole the district layout.


> "Allow undeads evolution"
Allow undeads to evolve into more powerful beings. Disabling this option makes the game much easier for the livings.


> "Max Reincarnations"
Number of times you can reincarnate in a game. Set it to 0 to disable reincarnation altogether.


> "Can Reincarnate to Sewers"
Enable the possibility to reincarnate in an avatar located in the sewers.


> "Civilians only Reinc."
When reincarnating, restrict choices to living civilians.
Disable this if you want to be able to reincarnate as a cop, biker, soldier, etc.


> "Permadeath"
Deletes your saved game when your character dies. Gives a x2 scoring bonus.


> "Death Screenshot"
Automatically takes a screenshot upon your death. Stored within your installation directory\Config\Screenshots\


> "Aggressive Hungry Civilians"
Hungry civilians without food will attack others who carry food or are standing on food.
They stop being aggressive if they can get food, so you are not forced to fight them.
Don't be surprised if you see civilians fighting each other. Survival of the fittest! This makes the living game harder.


> "Event - National Guard"
Affect how often the national guard will show up. A value of zero entirely disables the National Guard event.
The higher the option, the more often the national guard will show up. This makes the living game easier.
In any case, the NG only show up between certain dates and conditions. A high value doesn't mean the event will always fire.


> "Event - Supplies Drop"
Affect how likely the supplies drop event happens. The higher the option, the more often supples are dropped.
A value of zero entirely disables the supplies drop event. A high value does not mean the event will always fire.
This makes the living game easier.



HINTS FOR BEGINNERS
-------------------

* LIVING
>  Suggested character builds:
1. "Basher" : Male, Strong.  - Extra melee damage; helpful to see you to your first weapon
2. "Tough guy" : Male, Tough.  - Extra HP, always nice to have
3. "Dancer" : Male or Female, Hauler.  - Carry an extra item straight away
4. "Leader" : Male or Female, Leadership. - Get followers straight away

> Beginner strategy
A simple early strategy to prioritise vital items : food, medikits and protection.
- Avoid combat or use hit-and-run tactics against slower enemies.
- Explore the city to find a Shopping District.
- Get plenty of food : visit kitchens, grocery stores or trade for food.
- Make a base of operations in a shop, pushing shelves to block or open the entrance.
- Loot items from various buildings and store them in your base.
- Find a ranged weapon like a rifle or pistol.

* UNDEAD
The game is much harder early on; you can die very easily, but you need kills to evolve.
Your best bet is to keep a low profile and go only for the easy kills. You have to think like a predator!
- Lay traps by lurking, or follow other undeads and move in packs.
- Try to avoid actors carrying ranged weapons at all cost - cops in the early game are your worst enemies.
- Use the night and dark places to your advantage.

<end of manual>